infospace.co.ke

The ultimate information space

This is the definitive beans farming in Kenya complete guide with all information and answers to guide you on beans farming in Kenya. Be it you want to start commercial beans farming or beans farming for domestic purpose this guide is prepared specifically for you. Before venturing into beans farming in Kenya there are some of the questions you have been asking yourself we intend to answer all of these questions on this guide; beans farming in Kenya the complete guide

HOW TO GROW BEANS IN KENYA

PLANTING

Bean is one of the most important legume in the world and can be eaten in various ways whether cooked, fried or baked. Beans are planted for numerous reasons because of its nutritional and economical value. We shall proceed to discuss the full planting process here

Beans requires soil variety which is well drained and fertile, mostly soil rich in organic matter. Bean plants also tend to grow and mature faster in low altitude zones. A well distributed rainfall is required for the proper growth of beans although seasons should be well selected to avoid excessive rainfall during flowering period. Moderate temperature is required for the proper growth of beans and frost to be avoided

Beans plants are propagated using their seeds on a well harrowed land free from weeds and hardpans. The best seed selection is very crucial to avoid low quality yields avoid damaged, wrinkled and diseased seeds

BEANS SPACING

When your land is properly harrowed and you should consider at the onset of rainfall, dig small holes on the land in a uniform row to a depth of 1 to 2 inches and 30 to 15 cm between holes. Also consider 50cm between rows for ease of management Place one to two seeds in each hole and add farmyard or DAP fertilizer. Cover with soil lightly. Do the same when intercropping with maize plantation

Beans are one of the plants with very low maintenance cost during growth but you may continue with the normal farm practices to monitor and maximize your bean production

FARM PRACTICES FOR BEANS

Soil conditioning: This is done by application of manure or CAN to the soil this is done in moderation too much nutrients or too little nutrients may damage your beans plantation

Weeding: this is the removal of unwanted plants on the area where you may have grown your beans. Weeds harm the proper growth of the beans

Monitoring: this is done by frequently checking for pest and diseases. Some pests may invest in beans making it necessary for integration of pest management practices

By following this practices within a matter of weeks your beans should be growing vigorously and rapidly you will even notice flowering.

HARVESTING OF BEANS

Within a period of 80 to 120 days depending of the beans variety or ecological conditions your beans will have turned yellow and now ready for harvesting. To notice full maturity of beans you notice the yellowish or brownish color and even seeds dropping.

You can now harvest your beans when green or when dry, before storage be sure to dry the beans on the sun to remove moisture. The beans plantation are normally harvested by uprooting the whole plants and dried on the sun for one to two weeks where they can be placed on sacks and grounded to expose the beans from the pods. The pods can later be used as feeds or to create farmyard manure

Beans are stored on sacks and kept for storage after application of insecticides or taken directly to the market.

MARKETTING OF BEANS

After successfully harvesting your beans you are now ready for marketing after storage in sacks. Beans are sold in kilograms to various market around Kenya or in debes for small scale traders.

An acre of bean plantation can produce up to 20 bags of beans 90 kg each in 90 days and 1 bag can cost up to 6500kshs shillings which varies according to time and availability and bean variety. This should proof how profitable is bean farming in Kenya.

There is always ready market for your beans in Kenya you can market beans in schools and institutions, fast food chains, hotels and open air markets.

ALSO READ ON:

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ON BEANS FARMING IN KENYA

Beans farming in Kenya is done in almost all parts of the country However, Eastern, Nyanza, Central, Western and Rift valley are the major bean growing provinces.

An acre of bean plantation can produce up to 20 bags of beans 90 kg each in 90 days and 1 bag can cost up to 6500kshs shillings which varies according to time and availability and bean variety. This should proof how profitable is bean farming in Kenya.

PESTS: bean fly, cutworms, aphids, leaf miners, pod borers, whiteflies and thrips

DISEASES: Bean rust, downy mildew, anthracnose, Bacterial wilt, Fusarium wilt

I recommend the use of organic farmyard manure as it is cheaply available however DAP fertilizer should be applied at the rate of 1/2 bag/acre (25 kg/acre) during planting. The fertilizer should be thoroughly mixed with soil before covering the seed

Within a period of 80 to 120 days depending of the beans variety or ecological conditions your beans will have turned yellow and now ready for harvesting. To notice full maturity of beans you notice the yellowish or brownish color and even seeds dropping

To maximize the bean production, you require to plant 50 kilos of beans seed for 1 acre.

There is a very wide range of beans varieties grown in Kenya we sampled you the best on the list below

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

 
