infospace.co.ke

The ultimate information space

This is the cabbage farming in Kenya complete guide for you to read and learn all you need to know about starting and growing your cabbage farm whether for domestic or commercial purpose. Cabbage is a green leafy vegetable with a dense head that is always grown in Kenya for its nutritional and economical purpose. Before venturing into cabbage farming in Kenya you might have asked yourself several questions. We intend to answer all the questions on this cabbage farming complete guide

HOW TO START CABBAGE FARMING IN KENYA

PLANTING

Seeds are bought from your nearest Agro dealer ensure that you choose the best seeds as this is the main factor in the value of cabbage production. Prepare a good nursery bed with fine soil and you can also mix farmyard manure to the soil. Plant seeds on the nursery on even furrow-like lines. Normal caring of the nursery bed by irrigation and weeding up to 4 to 6 weeks when the cabbage seedlings can be transplanted continues. This is when the cabbage seedlings have attained true leaves and has a height of 3 inches tall.

The land to be transplanted to should be ploughed and harrowed properly to be made free from weeds and hardpans. Cabbage requires well-draining soil and enough sunlight areas. Make furrow ridges on the land and ensure spacing between the seeds because cabbages can grow up to 6 kilograms per head.

Add farmyard manure or organic manure to the ridges and cover the seedlings firmly with soil.

The rows should be well spaced and on even lines. Regular irrigation when there is less or minimum rainfall continues wedding also continues to allow the cabbages to grow and mature.

Cabbage spacing

Spacing of the transplanted seedlings should be 18 inches on furrows or between holes dug and 2 feet between rows. This will enable proper growth and handling of your cabbage vegetables.

ALSO READ ON:

FARM PRACTICES

Water application: this should be done in right proportion once daily be it in evenings or morning but the best period is evenings. Avoid overwatering or under watering. Avoid watering cabbages from the top this May harbor diseases

Soil conditioning: This is done by application of manure to the soil this is done in moderation too much nutrients or too little nutrients may damage your cabbage plants

Weeding: this is the removal of unwanted plants on the area where you may have grown your cabbage plants. Weeds harm the proper growth of the passion fruits

Mulching: This is optional you can mulch your cabbage plants to suppress weeds or conserve moisture on the soil

Monitoring: this is done by frequently checking for pest and diseases. Some pests may invest in cabbage plants making it necessary for integration of pest management practices

By following this practices within a matter of weeks your cabbage vegetables should be growing vigorously and you will even notice growing heads

As your cabbage plantation continue to grow and mature it is important to consider application of water soluble fertilizers to energize the plant to produce large well-formed cabbage heads.

HARVESTING OF CABBAGE

When the cabbage plants develop hard and mature heads at around the period of 50 to 100 days of planting, they are now ready for harvesting. To test for cabbage maturity a farmer should squeeze the cabbage head firmly to feel its hardness. Harvesting is done using a sharp knife by cutting of the head from the stem. The remainder roots from soil can later be pulled out and turned into compost.

Cabbage seed Rate: 120g/ Acre

Cabbage Yield: 10,000-15,000 heads/ Acre (Around 20 tons)

ALSO READ SUKUMAWIKI FARMING THE COMPREHENSIVE GUIDE

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS ABOUT CABBAGE FARMING IN KENYA

When the cabbage plants develop hard and mature heads at around the period of 50 to 100 days of planting, they are now ready for harvesting. To test for cabbage maturity a farmer should squeeze the cabbage head firmly to feel its hardness. Harvesting is done using a sharp knife by cutting of the head from the stem.

Cabbages per acre has been broken down into the summary below. Note that this will depend on the farmers input and care of the cabbage farm

Cabbage seed Rate: 120g/ Acre

Cabbage Yield: 10,000-15,000 heads/ Acre (Around 20 tons)

Farmyard manure is always the best for planting cabbages as it is less costly. Cabbages can also be top dressed with CAN fertilizer 4 weeks after transplanting

The best cabbage varieties grown in Kenya include

QUISOR F1 – The Cabbage with just the head for business. A medium head size cabbage suitable for all markets.

Cabbage market in Kenya

Cabbage is also one of the most consumed vegetable in Kenya hence offering ready market for farmers, cabbages can be sold in

Cabbage pests and diseases

These cabbage pests and diseases can be controlled by application of necessary pests and diseases.

Insightful

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

 
