Caffeine addiction can cause people to become irritable and moody when they do not get their fix.


By 
Fiona Muthoni




Caffeine addiction is a severe problem that affects millions of people around the world. Health effects include insomnia, anxiety, and heart problems. While caffeine may have been considered merely a harmless drug for those who need a morning boost or an afternoon pick-me-up, it has become clear that caffeine is addictive and dangerous.

Caffeine, also known as trimethyl xanthine, is a psychoactive stimulant found in coffee, tea, and chocolate. It has numerous functions including increasing alertness, boosting energy levels, improving performance during physical and mental tasks, and suppressing sleep. Caffeine works by blocking adenosine receptors in the brain, which are responsible for slowing down neural activity. This stops the "sleepiness" signal to the brain, so you will feel more awake for more extended periods.

Caffeine is a drug that affects everyone differently. Moderate amounts can give people an energy boost and make them more alert. Still, it is highly addictive and causes withdrawal symptoms if you suddenly stop consuming caffeine after being dependent on it for a long time. Some people can handle caffeine, and it doesn't affect them much while others suffer from side effects like irritability, headaches, nausea, insomnia, increased heartbeat, abnormal heart rate, and high blood pressure.

Caffeine addiction can cause people to become irritable and moody when they do not get their fix, which leads to a vicious cycle of drinking even more caffeine in an attempt to feel better. Many caffeine addicts are constantly tired, yet they drink coffee to try and stay awake.

Excessive consumption of caffeine can also lead to an unhealthy lifestyle. Therefore, it is important for those addicted to cut back on the amount they consume before their addiction takes a toll on other aspects of their lives.

Other withdrawal symptoms include:

Gradually cut back on the amount of caffeine you consume each day. For example, if you drink a cup of black coffee in the morning, switch to half caffeinated and half decaf during the second week. Then switch from drinking two cups per day to one or none.

Caffeine is a drug that affects everyone differently and should be treated with caution. If you're suffering from withdrawal symptoms after stopping caffeine consumption, then it's time to cut back on your intake before a full-blown addiction sets in. However, for those who cannot quit, there are healthy alternatives such as:

Alternatives:

Caffeinated drinks such as coffee can be replaced with decaffeinated beverages, herbal teas, or hot chocolate.


If you already have a mental health condition, it is advisable to avoid alcohol until the issue has been addressed. 


Since coffee can be both helpful and harmful depending on the dose, find a level of consumption that is healthy for you.


It emerged that a last-minute intervention by President Kenyatta facilitated Musyoka’s return to the Azimio fold.


From 25 per cent households headed by a single parent in 2009, the number had shot to a staggering four out of 10 three years ago


This will be Ms Karua's first visit to Nyanza since she was unveiled as Mr Odinga's running mate. 


If you have an Ad-blocker please disable it and reload the page or try again later.



Nation Media Group © 2022


Welcome!