infospace.co.ke

The ultimate information space

This is the profitable carrots farming in Kenya definitive guide with all information and answers to guide you on profitable carrots farming in Kenya. Be it you want to start commercial carrot farm or carrots farming for domestic purpose this guide is prepared specifically for you. Before venturing into carrots farming in Kenya there are some of the questions you have been asking yourself we intend to answer all of these questions on this guide;

HOW TO GROW CARROTS IN KENYA

PLANTING

Carrot is a tuber crop grown in Kenya mainly for commercial and domestic consuming, it is mostly used as a spice to prepare almost every meal. The main varieties of carrots grown in Kenya include, Samba, Sunrise F1, Nantes, Chanteny, Amsterdam,Minicolor, Super koruda, Napolitana F1. We shall skip directly to its ecological requirements. Carrots does well in areas of 700mm above sea level, rainfall of 450-600mm during the growing period, Well drained, deep, fertile sandy loam or clay loam with pH 5.5-7.0 and a temperature of 15-22 degrees Celsius.

Carrots are planted by direct seeding, or grown on nursery beds directly. The land where carrots are to be planted should be ploughed deeply and perennial weeds removed completely, the seedbed should be harrowed to a fine tilt. We recommend the planting of carrots directly on the farm rather than transplanting.

Make furrows of 15cm apart and 2cm deep you can combine seeds with light soil before sowing, farmyard or compost manure can be used when growing carrots. You are supposed to leave 2 to 4cm between seedlings so thinning immediately after germination should be done. This spacing encourages the growth of strong mature carrots roots.

Regular farm practices for carrots farm continues

Weeding: this is the removal of unwanted plants on the area where you may have grown your carrots. Weeds harm the proper growth of the carrots

Monitoring: this is done by frequently checking for pest and diseases. Some pests may invest in carrots making it necessary for integration of pest management practices

Watering of carrots also can continue in areas with minimal or low rainfall

Carrots is normally top-dressed with 200kg of CAN per hectare when carrots attain 10cm length

CARROTS PESTS

CARROTS DISEASES

By following the farm practices within a matter of weeks your carrots should be growing vigorously and rapidly.

HARVESTING OF CARROTSCarrot mature in 3-4 months. Harvesting is done by lifting the roots and leaves cut at the base. Harvesting stage depend on the intended use of the carrots, for fresh markets harvest when the shoulder diameter is 2-3cm and for carrots processing varieties harvesting is done when the shoulder with is 3.8 and above. 

Carrots can yield up to 20tonnes per hectare this proofs how profitable carrot farming is. After harvesting carrots sorting and grading can be done. Sorting can be done according to root size, and in terms of girth.

Storage of carrots is in crates and should be correctly placed to avoid breakages.

MARKETTING OF CARROTS IN KENYA

The price of carrots in Kenya is 25shillings per Kg. The average price for a tone is US$ 230.02 in Mombasa and Nairobi. This proofs how profitable carrots farming in Kenya is.

Carrots can be exported or sold locally in markets, supermarkets and institutions.

ALSO READ ON:

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

 
