Heart disease is the leading cause of death in women.


By 
Fiona Muthoni




Women's health is a broad and complex topic, encompassing everything from reproductive health to mental health and everything in between. There are a host of health concerns that women should be aware of, from heart disease and cancer to osteoporosis and depression.

By being informed and taking proactive steps to maintain their health, women can live long, happy, and healthy lives. Here are just a few of the most important health concerns women need to know about. 

Depression is a common mental health disorder that can have a wide range of negative impacts on a person's life. Both sexes as well as young adults are vulnerable to depression.

Depression can seriously impact physical health, relationships, work performance, and quality of life. It can even lead to suicide.

Thus, it is essential that women learn about depression and what they can do if they think they might be developing the condition.

Gynaecological health issues are a broad category that can affect the female reproductive system. Common gynaecological problems include endometriosis , urinary incontinence, and pelvic pain.

These conditions can significantly impact a woman's quality of life, causing pain, discomfort, and fertility problems.

Sexually transmitted infections (STIs) are another common gynaecological concern. STIs can cause a range of symptoms and if left untreated, can lead to serious health problems.

Cancer is a broad term for a group of diseases that cause abnormal cell growth. Cancer can affect any part of the body, and there are many diverse types.

Cancer is a leading cause of death in women, with breast cancer being the most common type. Other common types of cancer that affect women include ovarian, cervical, and endometrial cancer.

With early detection and treatment, many types of cancer are highly curable.

Maternal health refers to women's health during pre-conception, pregnancy, childbirth, and the postpartum period.

Pregnancy is a time of great physical and emotional change, and it is important for women to be aware of the potential risks and complications.

By being informed and taking care of themselves, women reduce their risk of developing problems during pregnancy and ensure a healthy outcome for themselves and their babies.

Heart disease is the leading cause of death in women, yet many women are unaware of their risk. There are many different types of heart disease, and the symptoms can vary depending on the type. However, common signs include chest pain, shortness of breath, fatigue, and irregular heartbeat.

Women need to maintain a healthy weight, exercise regularly, eat a healthy diet, and avoid smoking.

This health condition occurs when bones become weak, making them susceptible to fractures. Although osteoporosis is most common in older adults, it can affect people of any age. Women are particularly at risk for this condition.

However, there are several things women can do to reduce their risk of developing this health condition. For example, getting enough calcium and vitamin D, exercising regularly, and avoiding smoking can help keep bones healthy and strong.

If you are concerned about osteoporosis, talk to your doctor about ways to reduce your risk. Knowing the signs and symptoms of this condition is also important so that you can seek treatment if necessary.


As with other conditions related to pregnancy, fluctuating hormone levels during pregnancy and after childbirth are usually the triggers of hair loss.


Among children under the age of five years, low birth weight was the eighth cause of hospital admissions, accounting for 2.6 percent of all child hospitalisations that were recorded in 2020. 


It emerged that a last-minute intervention by President Kenyatta facilitated Musyoka’s return to the Azimio fold.


From 25 per cent households headed by a single parent in 2009, the number had shot to a staggering four out of 10 three years ago


This will be Ms Karua's first visit to Nyanza since she was unveiled as Mr Odinga's running mate. 


If you have an Ad-blocker please disable it and reload the page or try again later.



Nation Media Group © 2022


Welcome!