infospace.co.ke

The ultimate information space

We have prepared you a full guide to dairy farming this is to answer all the questions you need to know and of course to start, scale and develop your dairy farming, Before venturing into dairy farming you probably have asked yourself some of these questions (Remember that this guide has been tailored to answer all the questions stated and bonus tips which are clearly researched and proven to be effective in dairy farming

What is dairy farming? This말s a type of agriculture that is focused on producing milk. This is different from raising animals to produce meat. Milk맊an막e used to produce맋airy맗roducts, including cheese. Species commonly used마re맊ows (so-called맋airy맊ows), but goats, sheep and camels마re마lso used. In this guide we shall look into dairy farming in cows this is because it is the most kept animal for dairy.

HOW CAN I START DAIRY FARMING

This is always the first question that comes to mind when you have decided to venture in this dairy farming field. The first step here is doing thorough and extensive research. This is not because dairy farming is a very difficult venture but it is a step in ensuring that you gain the basic knowledge to get you started.

We all know that dairy farming as a business has a very high potential and is a high rapid growing venture in Africa and beyond. In Africa, Dairy farming has been a way of life and has been a means of livelihood and nutritional value. So the talking points here is to conduct in-depth market research to determine the current trends and feasibility study. This can be assisted by attending seminars, reading dairy magazines and also there are a lot of helpful articles online

Before venturing on Dairy farming here are the Key strengths you should look into

Key weaknesses on Dairy farming

HOW MUCH MONEY DO I NEED TO START A DAIRY FARM

This will be answered regarding your type of dairy whether large scale commercial, small scale commercial or domestic will attract different amount of money to start. Dairy farming can be a lucrative and rewarding business nowadays, but determining the amount of capital required to start a dairy farm can be a difficult and intimidating task. To calculate the cost of starting a dairy farm, document some basic information on a spreadsheet. Start by following some common steps.

These guidelines above will go a long way in getting you started.

ALSO READ:

POULTRY FARMING IN KENYA FULL GUIDE

PROBLEMS ENCOUNTERED BY DAIRY FARMERS IN KENYA

HOW PROFITABLE IS DAIRY FARMING

According to oxfarm.co.ke on evaluation of dairy farming profits regarding various factors, net profit per cow could be 16,375 per month. Now if you keep more animals you definitely lower your costs and increase your margins. Considering that you could make your own rations, and do value addition to your milk returns per month per cow could be as high as Kshs 20,000.

The critical factors for dairy production are always

WHAT SHOULD BE CONSIDERED BEFORE STARTING A DAIRY FARM

We outlined you the basic needs you should consider before starting a dairy farm in the list below;

HOW MANY COWS DO I NEED TO START A DAIRY FARM

It is important to put into consideration that starting small and scaling your farm upwards later is effective. One or two cows may be too few and over six cows may be too many for most beginners. Five to six cows have always been a good number which then can be progressively increased as you build and improve the herd. Remember to always keep in mind the initial cost of each cow you intend to keep in your farm

LIST OF SUCCESSFUL DAIRY FARMS IN KENYA

We round up this guide with some examples of the successful dairy farms in Kenya this should motivate you to start and scale your dairy farms with lessons learnt from the list. Remember to research on this farms to see what they did well in order to become successful in this venture. As the saying goes learn from the best

Dairy companies

ALSO READ ON:

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

 
