Everton's Tyler Onyango (second right) in action during the Premier League 2 International Cup match between Everton and PSV on October 30, 2019 in Southport, England.


By 
Wangu Kanuri




Everton midfielder Tyler Onyango is holidaying in Mombasa.

The footballer, who made his breakthrough in the just ended 2021/22 English Premier League season, posted photos showing him relaxing on the beach at the Kenyan Coastal city on his Instagram page.

Onyango, born in England to a Kenyan father and English mother, joined Everton aged eight and signed his first professional contract in July 2020, penning a three-year deal with the club.

Having consistently shone for Everton’s Under-18 team, Onyango was promoted to the Blues’ Under-23-set-up during the 2019/20 campaign.

Additionally, the 19-year-old played in seven Premier League 2 matches before the season was ended early due to the coronavirus pandemic.

He made his senior debut for the club on November 21 last year, in Everton's 3-0 loss to Manchester City at Etihad Stadium in the league.

Onyango turned down a chance to play for Kenya during the 2022 Fifa World Cup qualifiers despite being handed a call up by then coach Engin Firat.

Mombasa, Kenya’s second-largest city located along the coast is one of the world’s preferred tourist destinations with millions of visitors streaming in from all over the world.

Onyango’s visit comes barely a month after African football legend Samuel Eto’o toured Malindi with his family.

Eto’o, a former Barcelona, Chelsea and Inter Milan forward, confirmed the news on his social media pages after posting a picture with his family.


We come to you.
We are always looking for ways to improve our stories. Let us know what you liked and what we can improve on.



It emerged that a last-minute intervention by President Kenyatta facilitated Musyoka’s return to the Azimio fold.


From 25 per cent households headed by a single parent in 2009, the number had shot to a staggering four out of 10 three years ago


This will be Ms Karua's first visit to Nyanza since she was unveiled as Mr Odinga's running mate. 


If you have an Ad-blocker please disable it and reload the page or try again later.



Nation Media Group © 2022


Welcome!