Gambling addiction can be related to other addictions, such as alcoholism.


By 
Fiona Muthoni


Gambling problems do not just affect one person, they often involve family members who have had their lives disrupted by an addict’s behaviour.



Gambling addiction affects many people. The more you gamble, the stronger your addiction becomes, and the harder it is to break free.

Here are some reasons people become addicted to gambling:

If you gamble in secret, it’s possible that your gambling is out of control and has become an addiction.

Particularly problematic behaviour includes:

One of the reasons people develop gambling addiction is because it is an easy way to escape from negative emotions. Gambling gives these people a sense of hope and excitement, even if only temporary. But they will lose all their money in the process and become depressed as a result.

In an interview with Aunt Truphena, a counseling psychologist, she said that gambling could cause anxiety, panic attacks, and to some extent, hallucinations.

She further advised that gamblers should be helped and not rejected. In other words, encourage the addict to seek help.

Rehabilitation

Treatment for a gambling addiction will depend on the severity of your problem.

The treatment options include group therapy, individual counselling, and residential rehabilitation, where you can get enough rest away from any temptations that may trigger a relapse.

Note that relapse is part of the recovery process and that it is not a sign of failure.

Talk to your doctor about the best plan for you before starting treatment because there may be other co-occurring conditions such as depression or anxiety disorders.

Behaviour change

You do not have to give up enjoyable things to stop gambling, but it is advisable to avoid anything that could make the problem worse.

You can also use meditation, yoga, and cognitive behavioural therapy (CBT) as effective treatments for depression caused by gambling addictions.


Treatment for sex addiction usually involves multiple therapeutic approaches.


Your words must acknowledge your spouse’s feelings and show compassion.


It emerged that a last-minute intervention by President Kenyatta facilitated Musyoka’s return to the Azimio fold.


From 25 per cent households headed by a single parent in 2009, the number had shot to a staggering four out of 10 three years ago


This will be Ms Karua's first visit to Nyanza since she was unveiled as Mr Odinga's running mate. 


If you have an Ad-blocker please disable it and reload the page or try again later.



Nation Media Group © 2022


Welcome!