Subscribe to our print & digital magazines now

We're social. Connect with us on: 

Popularly known as a Common man’s ‘Cow’ or goats are among the main meat-producing animals in India. Its meat (chevon) is one of the choicest meats which have huge domestic demand. Goat farming generally means, rearing goats for the purpose of harvesting milk, meat and fiber.

Popularly known as a Common man’s ‘Cow’ or goats are among the main meat-producing animals in India. Its meat (chevon) is one of the choicest meats which have huge domestic demand. Goat farming generally means, rearing goats for the purpose of harvesting milk, meat and fiber. Rearing of goats is not a new enterprise and the process has been taken place since the time immemorial.  

Rearing goats is a profitable business. Due to its good economic prospects, goat rearing under intensive and semi-intensive system for commercial production is gaining momentum for the couple of years.  

It should be noted that, high demand for goat and its products with potential of good economic returns are deriving many progressive farmers, businessmen, professionals, ex-servicemen and educated youths to take up the goat enterprise on a commercial scale. 

Currently, goat farming has become a profitable business and requires a very low investment due to its multi-functional utility. Also, commercial goat farming business is contributing to the economy and nutrition of a country in a big way. 

We all know that goats are multi-functional animals. One can produce a wide variety of products from them like, milk, meat, fiber, manure etc. The milk of goat is used for producing full cream goat powder, skimmed goat milk powder, goat butter, goat milk cream, fresh goat milk etc. 

However, goat meat is a great source of consumable meat which is very tasty, nutritious and healthy. Also goat’s wool is used in various purposes and its skin plays a crucial role in leather industry. 

Do you know the advantages of goat farming business? And tips to become a successful goat farmer? How you can start a profitable goat farming business? This article will provide answers to all these queries and will definitely help you to find great opportunities in this business.

There are many advantages and disadvantages of goat farming

1. Goat Products are Healthy & Easily Digestible: 

Goat products such as milk and meat are not only nutritious and easily digestible but are also a great source of regular income for the poor, landless and marginal farmers. It contributes immensely in rural economy and national income. Its meat and milk are cholesterol free and easily digestible. Goat milk is used for making different types of foods. They can produce milk, meat, skin, fiber and manure at the same time. 

2. Easy Maintenance & Less Capital: 

Small sized animal, goats are very easily maintained and cared by women and children. For being a successful goat farmer, one needs to do some common tasks like, feeding, milking and caring. These tasks do not require much equipment, capital, labor or hard work.  Their return of investment ratio is also very good. As goat farming business is very profitable, hence many government and non government banks are giving loans for starting this business. 

3. Don’t Require a Huge Area: 

Goats don’t require a huge area for housing due to their small body size. They can easily share their living place with their owners or his/her other livestock animals. Adding to it, goats are very suitable for mixed farming with other domestic animals.  

4. Good Breeders: 

Goats are not only very friendly and lovable in nature, but are excellent breeders too. You will be surprised to know that they reach sexual maturity within their 7-12 months of age and give birth to kids within a short time period. Also, some goat breed produces many kids per kidding.  

5. Less Risk: 

It is good to know that there is less risk even in drought prone areas for goat farming. It is not true in any other livestock farming business. Goats can be milked as often as required. This also prevents refrigeration costs and milk storage problems. 

6. Equal Price in Market: 

Do you know that both male and female goats have almost equal value/price in the market? Well Yes! It is true. Also, there is no religious taboo against goat farming and meat consumption. Therefore, commercial goat farming business has developed a potential way of employment for unemployed people. 

Their meat has a huge demand and high price in the local and international markets. You can also consider exporting your products to the foreign countries for more profits.  

7. Good Adaptability & Less Prone to Diseases: 

Goats are very much capable of adopting themselves with almost all types of agro climatic environments and conditions. They can even bear high and low temperature throughout the world and live happily. Adding to it, they can tolerate to hot climate more than any other animals. Diseases are also less in goats as compared to other domestic animals.  

8. Best Milk Producers: 

Due to this quality, goats are popularly called as the “foster mother of human”. Their milk is considered as the best milk for human consumption than any other species of livestock animal’s milk. The milk is low cost, nutritious, wholesome and easily digestible. In fact, all aged people from child to old can easily digest goat’s milk. Goat milk also has lesser allergic problems. It is also used as an Ayurvedic medicine for the people who are ailing with diabetes, asthma, cough etc. 

To be a Successful Goat Farmer and to start your own farm, you must know these things: 

1. Right Location:  

To find correct location is the first and most important point to be taken care of. Though, common goats generally survive in warm areas that are well drained. Besides temperature, space is also necessary. Goat lives in groups, hence individual pens are not effective. A large field is needed if you want your animals to roam freely. Such goats usually have better resistance to sickness and infection.  

The best locations considered for a goat farm are far from towns as urban pollution is dangerous to animal health. As goats eats a lot of grass on a daily basis. So, one must make sure their food source is highly accessible and not too far from the rearing area. 

2. Land Requirement:  

Goats can be reared intensively on small acreage by using supplemental feed. If you are using an extensive system, then 2 to 10 goats per acre is a rough guide depending on the supply of grass and brush.  

3. Goat Breed:  

There are breeds which produce more milk while there are others that grow quickly. Therefore, depending on your purpose, choose the type of breed you want to rear. You can also farm both types of breeds and you will be harvesting both meat and milk.  

However, you must note that different breeds require different levels of care. Do research and consult an expert so he can guide you to decide what will be best for your farm. 

4. Veterinarian: 

Easy access to a veterinarian plays an important role. When starting a goat farm, there are chances your animals to contract diseases. Thus, a veterinarian can help in disease control and management to avoid losses. They help you diagnose diseases or recommend vitamins and supplements to keep your animals in good health especially during stressful situations like weaning. 

5. Proper Food & Housing: 

Goats are very choosy with food. They don’t eat dried or soiled grass. You must make sure to have enough clean, fresh grass for them so they don’t go hungry. It is well known that goats are not carnivorous animal. They usually prefer to eat grasses, plants, shrubs, weeds and herbs. Goats also need energy, portion, vitamins, fiber and water for proper growth. 

A well-designed barn or shed and good management, will help you to reap all the profit from goat farming. Always keep the house neat, clean and dry. Arrange proper ventilation and drainage system inside the house. Ensure the availability of sufficient fresh air and light inside the house. 

6.  Good Transportation: 

A market near the farm land will be best, as it will help you to sell your products easily and buy necessary commodities. 

7. Care & Management: 

Always try to take proper care of your goats. Never feed them contaminated food or polluted water. Keep their house as much neat and clean as possible. Do clean their house on a regular basis. Take extra care to the breeding bucks, kids and pregnant does. Keep the kids with their mother for several weeks after their birth. 

Don’t use same buck for mating with numerous does at same day. Artificial insemination is also a good way for breeding your does. Vaccinate them on timely basis, to keep them free from all types of diseases and health problems. Keep a stock of some necessary vaccines and medicines.  

8. Vaccination: 

Many types of viral diseases like PPR, goat pox, foot and mouth diseases and bacterial diseases like anthrax, brucelosis etc. are very harmful for goats. Thus, proper vaccination is a must to prevent these types of diseases. The does which was not vaccinated PPR, goat pox, brucellosis vaccines previously, vaccinate them at the fifth month of gestation period. You must vaccinate the kids PPR vaccine when they reach 5 months of age.  

9. Total Expenditure & Profit: 

Total expenditure and profit from goat farming business is totally dependent on the farming system, location, breeds, feeding cost and few other factors. With good planning and proper management one can easily make goat farming business profitable. On one hand, small scale farming requires less investment and profit can contribute your regular income. 

On the other hand, large scale or commercial production requires high investment and some other additional costs.  

 

Read and do proper research and planning on how to raise goats.

Maintain good and strong health of your goats.

Choose the right and high productive goat breeds for your business.

Learn more about goat farming business from the nearest livestock training center or expert producers.

Goats like to live in groups. Hence, ensure a big area so that they can roam freely.

There should be availability of all equipments which are essential for goat farms.

Make sure a well bred conduct, to produce better milk, meat and to keep the goat free from diseases.

As per their daily demand, give them sufficient clean water, food and fresh grasses.

Never feed goats with contaminated food or polluted water.

Take extra care to the pregnant doe, breeding buck and kids.

Feed the buck extra nutritious food during the period of mating.

To improve your goat’s health contact visit a veterinarian regularly (if it’s possible).

During the summer season, provide them salt and mineral with a lot of water.

Keep them away from cold and rain to avoid mass death.

Although, there are some risk in every business. But, taking proper care and good management can ensure better production and high profit. Goat farming can be concluded as a traditional, profitable, risk-less and very easy business because of its multi-utility and fast growing rate. They are also used as a tool for poverty reduction and play a crucial role in the economic growth of a country. 
