infospace.co.ke

The ultimate information space

This is the Complete Green grams farming guide to enable you start and grow your green grams for domestic or commercial purposes. Green grams alternatively known as the green gram, maash, moong, monggo, or munggo, is a plant species in the legume family. The mung bean is mainly cultivated in East, Southeast and South Asia. It is used as an ingredient in both savoury and sweet dishes. Wikipedia Before venturing into green grams farming in Kenya or anywhere there are a variety of questions you have asked yourselves, we intend to guide you on green gram farming and answer all these questions here.

HOW TO GROW GREEN GRAMS IN KENYA

Green grams are best grown at an altitude of 0-1600m above sea level well adapted to sandy loam and clayey soils at pH range of 5.5-7.5. They are drought tolerant with rain fall requirement range between 350- 700mm/annum. Heavy rain fall results to increased vegetative growth with reduced pod setting and development. Most parts of Kitui County are favorable for growing green grams.

There are various varieties of green grams grown in Kenya listed below

PLANTING

Land should be ploughed during the dry spell to allow for aeration and expose soil borne pests to die. Soil clods should be broken to medium tilth to create a soil structure that encourages seedlings emerge/germinate uniformly and rapidly. Manure should be applied at a rate 200 wheel barrows per acre. Terracing should be done during land preparation to reduce surface run off and moisture retention for crop sustenance.

Propagation of green grams is by seeds. Seeds are planted at a spacing of 45*15cm, a depth of about 3-5cm, An acre needs 4-6kg of green gram seeds. Germination occurs within 5-7 days and this depend on the variety and environmental factors. When using oxen plough for planting, place the seed at the side of furrow. Practice crop rotation because green grams have toxic residues and disease organisms that may affect the crop.

Foliar feeds should be applied before flowering and at fruiting stage to boost yield.

After planting your green grams regulars farm practices continues which include;

FARM PRACTICES FOR GREEN GRAM FARMING

Weeding

Weeding of green grams is done by uprooting unwanted plants that grows with the green grams to ensure that pest and diseases are prevented and also competition for nutrients with plants are reduced and discouraged. When the crop begins flowering, weeding should be minimizes in order to prevent disturbances.

GREEN GRAMS PESTS AND DISEASES

GREEN GRAMS HARVESTING

Green grams mature within 60-90 days after sowing, depending on environmental factors as well as the variety. Physiological maturity harvesting is the stage of growth in which the plant has completed its physiological development or when it has developed enough to provide a useful products to the farmer. Harvesting is generally done by hand-picking at weekly intervals. The legumes are harvested when the seed pod s are dry, shriveled and the seeds inside are hard. You can pick and dry individual pods or uproot the whole plant and dry it for about two days, then thresh and clean. Harvesting is the most expensive process in growing green grams. Threshing –can be done using either mechanical or manual methods, in mechanical u can use pulse thresher which makes work easier and faster, manually u can use beating stick. To avoid dirt and foreign materials spread on polythene paper. Winnow to separate grains from foreign materials.

GREEN GRAMS MARKET

High demand for green grams crops has provided ready market for this kind of crop. Price of green grams ranges from 40 to ksh.100 per kg depending on quality, seasonality and market forces of demand and supply. Green grams can be sold in;

The suitable seeding rate for sorghum is An acre needs 4-6kg of green gram seeds. Green grams produces 3 to 4 bags of 90kg per acre.

BEANS FARMING GUIDE

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

 
