Add visual stimulation by using massage oils that come in assorted colours.


By 
Fiona Muthoni


A sensual massage is a fantastic way to relax and connect with your partner.

It is also a great way to de-stress, improve blood circulation, and promote better sleep.

If you are thinking about giving your partner a massage, these tips will help you get started. From setting the mood to choosing the right massage oil, there are a few things to keep in mind.



Massage has many benefits, both physical and mental. It can improve blood circulation, joint mobility, and flexibility. It can also reduce stress and tension, promote relaxation, better sleep, and make you feel good.

Massage is a wonderful way to show your partner you care.

Here are a few tips to get you started:

Set the massage table or a soft surface to relax on

Firstly, you want your partner to be comfortable. Make sure the surface you choose is soft and won't cause any pain or discomfort.

Secondly, the area should be accessible to you. The too-high massage table will mean you strain to reach your partner.

With the massage area set, work on stimulating your partner's senses: sight, taste, smell, touch, and sound.

Sight

Creating a relaxing and sensual atmosphere is key to a successful massage. Set the scene by dimming the lights and using candles. This will set a relaxing mood. Scented candles are perfect for this.

Add visual stimulation by using massage oils that come in assorted colours. This will give your partner something to look at while you are massaging them.

Additionally, wear something revealing.

If you have the time and inclination, make a little video of yourself giving your partner the massage. This will get them excited about the experience!

Smell

Use essential oils or aromatherapy to stimulate your partner's sense of smell. This will help them relax and get in the mood for a massage.

There are a variety of oils to choose from, find one that your partner likes. Or experiment with a few different scents until you find one that works for both of you.

Taste

Having drinks such as wine, juice, or water on hand can increase the relaxation and sensuality of your massage. Offering sips to your partner during the massage is a great way to keep them hydrated and relaxed.

You could also try edible oils or lotions to add another dimension of taste to your massage.

Sound

Some people find that listening to calming music or nature sounds helps them relax during a massage. If this is the case for your partner, play calming music in the background.

Touch

The most important aspect of massage is touch. The right type of touch can relax your partner and get them in the mood for more.

Start with gentle strokes and work your way up to firmer pressure as the massage progresses. Use different strokes to keep things interesting for both of you.

Get started

First, let your partner take a shower or bath.

For better understanding, read about the basic massage techniques. There are various massage methods to choose from.

Pour massage oil into your hands, rub gently, and start with their back. These are often the areas that get most tense.

Next, work your way down their body, taking time to massage each muscle group.

Use different strokes and pressure to achieve the best results.

Finish by massaging their feet and legs to improve blood circulation and promote relaxation.

Focus on easy-to-forget areas, such as the ears, behind the knees, wrists, face, and jaws.

Take it a notch higher

Once you are comfortable with giving massages, why not take it up a notch?

Incorporate sensual massage techniques into your routine to increase intimacy and sexual tension between you and your partner.


It is Valentine’s Day. This is the day of love, flowers, chocolates, candlelight dinners, bubble baths, and lots of sex. In fact, sex is as synonymous with Valentine’s as the colour red.


Where pornography is an issue in the relationship, there will tend to be another bigger issue hiding beneath the surface. 


It emerged that a last-minute intervention by President Kenyatta facilitated Musyoka’s return to the Azimio fold.


From 25 per cent households headed by a single parent in 2009, the number had shot to a staggering four out of 10 three years ago


This will be Ms Karua's first visit to Nyanza since she was unveiled as Mr Odinga's running mate. 


If you have an Ad-blocker please disable it and reload the page or try again later.



Nation Media Group © 2022


Welcome!