Understanding changes that happen during menopause makes it easy to cope with symptoms.


By 
Fiona Muthoni








If you are in your 40s or 50s, you may be experiencing menopause. This time in a woman's life is marked by changes in the body, including fluctuations in hormones and hot flashes. While some women sail through menopause with hardly any symptoms, others find it challenging.

This article will discuss the body changes that occur during menopause and what you can do to manage them.

Few women sail through menopause without experiencing any emotional changes. For some, menopause brings feelings of sadness and loneliness. Others may feel angry and irritable.

These emotional changes can be attributed to hormonal fluctuations during menopause. Some women may also find it challenging to cope with the physical changes that menopause brings such as hot flashes and weight gain.

Night sweats can also cause sleep deprivation, further contributing to emotional instability.

Counselling and support groups can provide a forum for sharing experiences and coping strategies.

Exercise and relaxation techniques can also help to alleviate stress and improve mood.

Many women find that they have difficulty sleeping during menopause. This can be due to hot flashes, night sweats, anxiety, and stress.

If you are having trouble sleeping, there are some things you can do to improve the situation.

First, establish a regular sleep schedule and stick to it as much as possible. Avoid caffeine and alcohol before bed and create a relaxing bedtime routine.

If hot flashes keep you up at night, try taking a cool shower before bed or sleeping with a fan in your room.

Some medications such as melatonin supplements or prescription sleep aids can help with insomnia. Consult the doctor for such prescriptions.

Hot flashes are one of the most common symptoms of menopause, affecting a huge percentage of women.

A hot flash is a sudden feeling of warmth, often accompanied by a red, flushed face and sweating.

Hot flashes are experienced mostly at night but can also occur during the day.

They can last anywhere from a few seconds to several minutes. Some women experience them multiple times a day.

There are several things you can do to manage hot flashes.

Weight gain is a common symptom of menopause, and it can be attributed to a number of factors.

Hormonal changes during menopause can lead to an increase in body fat.

In addition, many women find that their metabolism slows down as they age, making it harder to maintain a healthy weight.

Some experience accumulation of fat around the abdomen, while others may see a general increase in overall body size.

You can do a few things to combat weight gain during menopause.

Many women experience a decrease in libido during menopause. This can be due to the hormonal changes that occur during this time and the physical changes (such as weight gain and vaginal dryness) and emotional changes (such as stress and anxiety).

There are a few things you can do to increase your libido.

As hormone levels fluctuate, many women experience longer or shorter cycle lengths, lighter or heavier bleeding, or skipped periods altogether. This is one of the first signs of menopause.

In addition, fertility decreases due to the lower number of eggs being produced.

If you are trying to conceive, it is important to talk to your doctor about your options.


In girls, puberty occurs between 8 and 13 years, but it may occur earlier or later. Every child is different, and changes can affect them differently. 


Cancer treatment and care costs go at between Sh. 758,000 and Sh. 2.48 million per case if a partial mastectomy, segmental mastectomy, lumpectomy, or quadrantectomy surgical procedure is...


It emerged that a last-minute intervention by President Kenyatta facilitated Musyoka’s return to the Azimio fold.


From 25 per cent households headed by a single parent in 2009, the number had shot to a staggering four out of 10 three years ago


This will be Ms Karua's first visit to Nyanza since she was unveiled as Mr Odinga's running mate. 


If you have an Ad-blocker please disable it and reload the page or try again later.



Nation Media Group © 2022


Welcome!