infospace.co.ke

The ultimate information space

This is the passion fruit farming in Kenya the definitive guide to answer all your questions regarding passion fruit farming how to start, grow and scale your passion fruit farm. Before you venture into passion fruit farming there are some of the questions you have asked yourselves we intend to answer all these questions on this definitive guide

These are the steps you need to follow in order to successfully start your passion fruit farm and reap big harvest

Keep in mind that in Kenya passion fruit is the 3rd most popular fruit after mangoes and bananas respectively this should be enough motivation to get you started in passion fruit farming world, furthermore passion fruits are perennial crops so when you get started you will continue reaping big for some years depending on your input and maintenance

Estimated Costs and Returns for One Acre (approximation varies due to different factors)

Returns When well taken care of, each plant should yield a minimum of 1kg and up to 2kg of fruit per week. Therefore, taking the lowest in an ideal situation, each crop yields 1kg per week giving a total of 650kg per week from an acre. The lowest farm-gate price of passion fruits is Ksh.50 per kg hence a weekly income of 32,500. That translates to an annual income of 1.69 million shilling

LAND PREPARATION FOR PASSION FRUITS

We shall begin with the first step of preparing your land to be ready for planting passion fruits this is if we keep in mind that you already have passion fruit seedlings ready or if not we will have another article for you to guide you on how to prepare passion fruit seedlings

The land to be planted should be properly harrowed to fine texture and free from weeds. You may also choose to spray the area with a suitable insecticide to keep the area free from pests and diseases. Dig holes on the area with the measurements of 45 by 45centimetres and spacing between them to be 2 meters. Ensure that the holes are in even rows

PLANTING

After the first step your land is now ready for planting the passion fruits. If it’s a rainy season you are good to go but if not water the holes with sufficient water when your land has enough moisture proceed to plant all the seedlings on the land 1 seedling per hole. On this stage care for the seedlings continue for about 2 weeks until the seedlings have adapted to the new conditions. The care done in this period include

Water application: this should be done in right proportion once daily be it in evenings or morning but the best period is evenings. Avoid overwatering or under watering.

Soil conditioning: This is done by application of manure to the soil this is done in moderation too much nutrients or too little nutrients may damage your passion fruits

Weeding: this is the removal of unwanted plants on the area where you may have grown your passion fruits. Weeds harm the proper growth of the passion fruits

Mulching: This is optional you can mulch your passion fruits to suppress weeds or conserve moisture on the soil

Monitoring: this is done by frequently checking for pest and diseases. Some pests may invest in passion fruits making it necessary for integration of pest management practices

By following this practices within a matter of weeks your passion fruits should be growing vigorously and you will even notice tendrils

PASSION FRUITS SUPPORT

Passion fruits are climbers and when you notice tendrils on your passion fruits support is now needed. Supporting of passion fruits is done by using poles which are firm and strong this support is made by placing these poles on each passion plant. After placing the poles on each passion plant you need to find strong posts which you will place on each column both ends. These posts will be used to guide wires through each poles on the plants. After fully constructing support you can start guiding the passion plant by tying them on poles with a sisal or cloth to avoid your passion fruit seedling growing on the ground. This is done continuously until your passion fruit reach on wires. An alternative to this is by using chain links or wire mesh

HARVESTING

With proper management of passion fruits within ten months of planting or less you should have noticed the fruits turning purple or black for the purple passion type. Others you will have noticed they have dropped off the vines. Now it’s time to pick your passion fruits ripened ones and are ready for market it is important to immediately market them to prevent weight loss. Passion fruits are in high demand in some areas like Uasin-Gishu 1kg can go for up to 80kshs per KG.

STORAGE

Harvested passion fruits are picked and stored on sacks where they are tied up with sisal ready for transportation to various markets. Don’t miss on the opportunity to reap big from passion fruit farming by failing to follow these necessary steps

FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS

It is important to immediately market passion fruits to prevent weight loss. Passion fruit farming in Kenya is highly profitable in some areas like Uasin-Gishu 1kg can go for up to 80kshs per KG.

With proper management of passion fruits within ten months of planting or less you should have noticed the fruits turning purple or black for the purple passion type. Others you will have noticed they have dropped off the vines. Now it’s time to pick your passion fruits because they have matured.

Passion fruits have a wide range of health benefits some of these benefits include

There are five common varieties of passion fruits grown in Kenya and they are listed below they include

There are various fertilizers for passion fruit farmers to choose from ranging from top dressing with CAN to dressing with farmyard manure. For me as an experienced passion fruit farmer I will always go with organic farmyard manure.

What is grafted passion fruits: graftage is a horticultural technique whereby tissues of plants are joined so as to continue their growth together. This greatly enhances the quality of the passion fruit seedling. Do you want to learn how to graft and make money from your grafted seedlings? click here

ALSO READ ON:

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

 
