infospace.co.ke

The ultimate information space

This is how to grow peas in Kenya guide with all information and answers to guide you on how to grow peas in Kenya. Be it you want to start commercial pea’s farm or peas farming for domestic purpose this guide is prepared specifically for you. Before venturing into peas farming in Kenya there are some of the questions you have been asking yourself we intend to answer all of these questions on this guide;

HOW TO GROW PEAS IN KENYA

PLANTING

Peas is a legume plant that can either be green and yellow In Kenya the main areas where peas is grown include, Nyandarua and Transnzoia. The varieties of peas grown in Kenya include;

The main variety of peas grown in Kenya is the snow peas and the ecological requirements for peas include: snow peas requires a fertile sandy- loamy soil that drain well, although peas tolerates most soil it is not tolerant to impermeable clay, peas thrive well in cool weather and altitude of between 1500-2600m above sea level, temperature of 12-20 degrees Celsius and well distributed rainfall of 1500mm to 2100mm

Planting of peas should be in a well ploughed and harrowed land free rom weeds, Peas are planted from their seeds and to improve germination, soak the seeds in water before planting on the field. Seeds are planted 1inch deep and spacing of 2 inches apart between seeds. Rows of planting peas should be 7 inches apart

Bush peas can reach 18 to 30 inches tall on height.  Pole types can grow to at least 4 to 6 feet tall. Both types benefit from support. You can construct support using chain link wires or support them on light poles for each plant.

For peas, fertilizers are not normally required but you can substitute fertilizers by using grass mulch.

Regular farm practices for peas farm continues

Weeding: this is the removal of unwanted plants on the area where you may have grown your peas. Weeds harm the proper growth of the peas

Monitoring: this is done by frequently checking for pest and diseases. Some pests may invest in peas making it necessary for integration of pest management practices

Watering of peas also can continue in areas with minimal or low rainfall

PEAS PESTS

The pests affecting peas include;

PEAS DISEASES

HARVESTING OF PEASPeas mature after 60 to 70 days of planting, peas are harvested when pods start to fatten, but before peas get too large. For best flavor consume peas directly during maturity period.

To harvest peas Use two hands when you pick peas to avoid damaging plant. Hold the vine with one hand and pull pods off with the other. Mature pea plants usually stop producing and die back in hot weather. Dry peas are harvested and can later be used as seeds

An acre piece of land can produce 400Kgs of fresh peas per week and harvesting can be done once per week for 13 weeks or more, this proofs how profitable peas farming in Kenya is. In Kenya 1 kg of peas can go up to 150 kshs, depending on time and availability.

MARKETTING OF PEAS IN KENYA

Large scale farmers of peas in Kenya can contact the exporters companies to help in sale, the main exporting companies in Kenya include; Homegrown Kenya Ltd, Idu Farm, Wamu Enterprises, Everest Enterprises and Kenya Horticultural Exporters Ltd (K.H.E)

Peas can also be sold locally on markets, supermarkets and institutions at a good price.

ALSO READ ON:

The information has been very useful. Thank you, I have just planted peas on my farm I believe its more than an acre not sure the actual size and I am looking forward to applying the skills I’ve learnt from this site. I’m hoping for maximum production and a ready market when they are ready for harvesting. I planted spinach earlier this year and my biggest challenge has been a market for the products,they are still in my farm and lately they have started developing black spots on the leaves. I’m still going through the vast agricultural knowledge in this site and I hope to learn more. If there’s any way you can help me get my products to a legit market please help, I’m willing to make the most out of my passion for agriculture

we shall be updating this guide subscribe via email to receive the latest on peas farming, Regarding this you can simply send us a private mail via our contacts tab to guide you accordingly

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

 
