Xtreme Returns is continually expanding in order to serve better.

7am - 7pm Mon - Sat.

The branch of agriculture known as “animal husbandry” concerns itself with the rearing of livestock for human use. Pigs are one of such animals that have been reared since time immemorial for their benefits—skin, gammon, bacon, and pork—to man. Thus, this article centres on the farming of pigs, mainly in a pig farm known as PIGGERY.

Many have postulated that the breeding of a pig is a more complex process than other kinds of livestock like goats, sheep, and so on. This is opined because pigs have greater sensitivity to the change in the climatic condition of the environment, and they usually require greater attention.

Nonetheless, on the advantageous side, female pigs, sows, can have about a dozen offspring in just over 4 months of pregnancy. What more, the offspring are usually ready to be sold faster than that of other reared animals.

While striking a balance between the pros and cons of pig farming, below are some important points to take note of when venturing into the world of pig rearing:

They should also be given food from plants like vegetables and corn; this is essential for their growth and development.



On the other hand, feeding of meat is not advisable, as it just increases its body’s chunk and reduces the growth level.

It is also important to note the kinds of pig farming systems available. This is so that the intended farmer can weigh his or her options and decide on which to run.

Pig farming systems are discussed below:

For such a system to run smoothly, the place should have a resistance to both dampness and heat as they can affect the health of the pigs. A structure made with concrete is very efficient for this.

Also, there should be a demarcation, in distance, between where the pigs sleep and where they feed, so that the feeding area can easily be made clean. A 3-metre width is sufficient to be used as the area to feed two pigs. Likewise, the area for sleeping can be half the area for feeding and should contain a bathing pool. With those criteria met for the intensive system of piggery, this livestock farming becomes a piece of cake.

In this system, pigs are free to roam around, but to an extent.

The necessity for running such a system is the availability of a fenced area having enough grass and soil. Fencing is needed for such an area so that the pigs do not wander too far away and get lost or stolen.

More so, the fence constructed should be one that cannot be damaged by a strong adult pig.

This is also a system of piggery that is easy to run when there is a necessary structure in place.

 

In conclusion, the rearing of pigs for commercial purposes can be a very lucrative business, as this livestock are beneficial for their pork meat and coarse hair for brushes. More so, as already noted, they breed many offspring at a time, and are highly valuable in the food market. In Europe, pigs are even used to sniff out truffles—a valuable, edible fungus. Even if the pigs are just desired as pets, they are relatively easy animals to rear, for all that it is worth.

