infospace.co.ke

The ultimate information space

This is the poultry farming in Kenya full guide to answer all your questions and all the information you need to start and grow your poultry farming in Kenya. Before starting a poultry farm in Kenya you probably have asked yourselves some of these many questions

We got you covered in all these questions and many more to enable you start your poultry farming in Kenya from scratch. All the information on this guide is clearly researched and is proven regarding the trends on poultry farming in Kenya.

How to start a poultry Farm in Kenya

SELECT A POULTRY TYPE

Poultry farming in Kenya is a very profitable venture, in this guide we are going to take in-depth knowledge on chicken this is because it is the most kept bird in poultry farming in Kenya. Other types of poultry kept include;

Under poultry type there is also a selection of chicken types to be kept whether it is Kienyeji, or kuroiler and others listed here. The table below can help you choose your preferred type

KARI Kienyeji: This was bred from a range of indigenous chickens in Kenya by KARI (now KARLO) Naivasha. There are five distinct types distinguished by their colors

Kuroiler: This breed entered Kenya from Uganda but originates from India

Kenbro: This is a Kenchick breed

The rainbow rooster: This is a multi-colored breed originating from India.

Here is a summarized table showing different Kienyeji chicken breeds with their characteristics:

BUSINESS PLAN

After you have selected your preferred type of poultry bird which in this article will be based on chicken you now have to get a business plan for your farm. You may choose to start a small commercial poultry farm or a large scale poultry commercial farm. You may also be planning on just a domestic poultry farm either way, this is where the need to have a business plan occurs

To start a commercial poultry farm in Kenya some of the things you should consider is planning of the finances, objectives of your poultry farm, budget for your poultry farm, resources required to start your poultry farm and the profits you aim to generate on the long term. This is not rocket science as there are many established poultry farmers in Kenya making a ton of profits and decent income from their commercial poultry farms

Keep in mind that a small domestic poultry farm in Kenya requires smaller space, less capital compared to a larger commercial poultry farm.

POULTRY HOUSING

To start and manage your poultry well you need to have a correctly established poultry farm, a good housing for your poultry is very important as it will help you in;

In poultry housing in Kenya you should consider commercial goals for your poultry farm, rearing methods, the scale of your poultry farm and the conditions of the place of farming whether urban or rural area. There are several styles of creating simple or complex poultry farming houses all you need to do is search for ways you can create on your own or simply hire an expert to develop a good housing.

HOW MUCH SPACE DO YOU NEED FOR YOUR POULTRY

Regarding this question, common estimates vary but mostly common space you need for poultry is 2 to 3 feet inside per bird depending on the size of chicken for 100 chickens, inside housing should be at least 200 square feet and a 10 by 20 foot rectangle. Also consider an 8 feet high to give you comfortable space inside the poultry housing. To calculate the amount of chicken you are willing to keep just use the 100 chicken for 200 square feet rule and you are good to go.

Frequently asked questions

Kindly note that the calculation are based on the current market prices which may vary with time and with your locality. It is also worth noting that the estimates are broadly based on the major expenses, housing services and type of breeds you need to acquire

To calculate the amount of chicken you are willing to keep just use the 100 chicken for 200 square feet rule and you are good to go.

To start poultry farming is not that hard as a beginner thanks to all the available online resources where you can do thorough research and also this guide should help

With all the knowledge in this guide you can choose to start a small poultry farm of your choice and also keep in mind that there are other numerous pieces of information available online for free

There are so many successful stories of poultry farmers in Kenya which can keep you motivated and get you started. Always check for interviews and testimonials on YouTube for real life information.

There are various factors on how to gauge the money or capital you need for a poultry business some of the factors are the size of farm you need, types of poultry and so many other factor. Be sure to check on our next business newsletters for updates regarding this. Subscribe to our newsletters using your email for more updates.

I am interested in raising chickens. I am a beginner. I have sufficient space.

Your email address will not be published. Required fields are marked *

Comment *

Name * 

Email * 

Website 

 Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

 
