infospace.co.ke

The ultimate information space

This is the guide to subsistence farming with all the details you need to know about subsistence farming, who uses subsistence farming, subsistence farming practices, types of subsistence farming, examples of subsistence farming and many more on subsistence farming

Subsistence farming: Subsistence agriculture occurs when farmers grow food crops to meet the needs of themselves and their families on smallholdings. Subsistence agriculturalists target farm output for survival and for mostly local requirements, with little or no surplus.  Wikipedia

Characteristics of subsistence farming

Advantages of subsistence farming: One of the benefits of Subsistence Agriculture is that it is cheap and cost effective. No requirement of huge investments as would otherwise have been needed by a commercial farmer is the prime reason for its cost effectiveness. The tools, kits and implements that are used are easy to obtain and mostly not expensive.

Types of subsistence farming

Water management in subsistence farming

Simple tips to keep moisture in the soil

Keep soil moisture: During dry periods, some soils are more and some are less in a position to supply crops with water. The ability of a soil to absorb and store water largely depends on the soil composition and on the content of organic matter. Soils rich in clay can store up to three times more water than sandy soils. Soil organic matter acts as storage of water, just like a sponge. Therefore, crop residue or a cover crop protects the soil, prevents crusting on the surface, and slows runoff. Roots, earthworms and other soil life maintain cracks and pores in the soil. Less water runs off, and more sinks into the soil.

Reduce evaporation: A thin layer of mulch can considerably reduce the evaporation of water from the soil. It shades the soil from direct sunlight and prevents the soil from getting too warm. Shallow digging of the dry top soil can help to reduce the drying up of the soil layers beneath (it breaks the capillary vessels). A better retention of water within the soil saves costs on irrigation.

Better use of season’s rainfall: Ripping during the dry season allows farmers to plant earlier – right at the start of the rains

O

 
