Farming

Vegetable Farming

Fruit Farming

Livestock Farming

Videos

Sugarcane (Saccharum officinarum) is a widely grown family Gramineae (Poaceae) crop. Sugarcane is a significant source of sugar in all tropical and subtropical countries. It is the most environmentally friendly crop, requiring minimal fertilizers and pesticides. It gets most of its necessities from the rich, moist soil of the region. Let’s check out more information about Sugarcane farming in the USA below.

Sugarcane fields not only produce food but also provide valuable habitats for animals. Sugarcane is a thick-growing member of the grass family with a high content of sap or juice. It is tender to cool, the tops being killed by temperatures just below freezing. In the United States, where freezing can occur during the winter, it is mainly planted in the late summer or early autumn season and is harvested one year later. However, it can be grown almost any time in tropical countries as the plant does not have a resting period. 

The active growth season lasts 7 to 8 months in the continental United States, while growth continues until harvest in the tropics. It results in heavy production of Sugarcane and sugar in tropical conditions. In Hawaii, for example, Sugarcane and sugar yields per acre, where Sugarcane is grown for about two years before harvest, are 3 to 4 times higher than a season’s growth in Louisiana and Florida. In addition to contributing to the national exchequer, it directly or indirectly employs more than one million people. 

In excluding Puerto Rico, production in the United States averaged 2,550,000 tons – from 592,000 acres in Hawaii, Florida, and Louisiana. Puerto Rico’s sugar production averaged 850,000 tons in two years. The largest producer of Sugarcane in the United States is Florida, followed by Louisiana, Texas, and Hawaii. Louisiana Sugarcane harvesting usually begins in October. However, the farmer should keep one percent of his farm planted with new seed Sugarcane annually. Before harvest, it is essential to plant, but rain and muddy conditions can delay planting. 

In the United States, planting Sugarcane will provide the best chance of success in the USDA Plant Hardiness Zone 9-10, including parts of Florida, Louisiana, Hawaii, and Texas. Sugarcane grows in furrows (or trenches) that you make in nitrogen-rich soils. Growing Sugarcane requires living in tropical climates like Hawaii, Florida, and Louisiana. It is produced in limited quantities in Texas and a few other Gulf coastal states.

In case you missed it: Top 24 Steps to Boost Sugarcane Yield: How to Increase Production, Size, and Quality

Since Sugarcane is all hybrid, Sugarcane is sown using stems obtained from the mother plant of a suitable breed. These, in turn, sprout, creating clones that are genetically identical to the mother plant. Because Sugarcane plants are so diverse, the use of seeds for breeding results in plants different from the mother plant, so plant breeding is used. Although there is a growing interest in developing machinery to reduce labor costs, the planting process usually occurs from late August to January. 

Sugarcane fields are replanted every two to four years. After the first year’s pruning, the second round of stalks, called ratoon, grows from the old. After each harvest of Sugarcane, the field is burned until the yield level decreases. The field will be plowed at that time, and the ground will be prepared for a new crop of Sugarcane plants. Sugarcane care is completed with cultivation and herbicides to control weeds in the plant. Sugarcane plants often need extra fertilizer for optimal growth.

Sugarcane production must be relatively close to the sugar factory to be profitable. There are government policies that limit the amount of sugar produced in the United States but support the price farmers receive, thus limiting the expansion of Sugarcane. Sugarcane is now harvested mechanically in the United States. 

In factories, Sugarcane is crushed to extract sugar, and the juice is boiled and then separated into sugar crystals for further processing and grinding. The stalk that remains after crushing is known as bagasse and is often burned at the factory to generate electricity but can be used to make paper, building boards, plastics, and mulching or animal bedding.

Planting is done by digging a shallow furrow and laying the canes end-to-end. The cane is then covered with mud extracted from the furrows. Sugarcane can also be grown in North Florida during March. Before the large-scale sweet market, almost every field had a patch of Sugarcane. As a result, sugarcane accounts for 62% of the world’s sugar. Currently, Sugarcane is grown on about 440,000 acres in the Everglades Agricultural Area (EAA), making it one of Florida’s most widely grown row crops. 

Production occurs mainly on land near or the southern half of Lake Okeechobee. Most Sugarcane production is in Palm Beach County, but Sugarcane is also grown in Hendry, Gladys, and Martin counties. About eighty percent of the crop is grown on highly organic soil and 20 percent on the sand. About 50% of the sugar produced in the United States comes from Florida, making up about 20% of all sugar (Sugarcane and beetroot) used. 

Florida’s sugar industry employs more than 14,000 people with an annual income of over $ 800 million, and the total economic value (with direct and indirect effects) is over $ 2 billion.  Sugarcane is Florida’s most valuable farm crop, worth more than the combined price of the Corn, Soybean, Tobacco, and Peanut crops are grown in Florida. The crop ranks 3rd in Florida’s agricultural economy behind the greenhouse and Citrus industries. All of Florida’s Sugarcane goes to one of the five mills that operate in South Florida. 

Corporate farmers make up about two-thirds of Sugarcane, while cooperative mills make up the rest. Raw sugar is transported to refineries by road, rail, or ship or is sold in its raw state. Sugarcane is a giant grass that grows in the sun, rain, and fertile dung of South Florida. Sugarcane is grown from late August to January. Sugarcane is harvested between late October and mid-April. 

In case you missed it: Best Fertilizer for Sugarcane: Organic, Biofertilizers, NPK, Compost Manure, and Schedule

Sugarcane can be grown as a hobby crop for syrup production or for “chewing cane,” but in South Florida, Sugarcane is grown commercially for crystal or white sugar production. Sugarcane production in Florida is concentrated in and around Lake Okeechobee. Palm Beach, Hendry, and Glades are counties in South Florida where Sugarcane production is particularly important. However, sugarcane is grown in all parts of Florida.

However, the commercial Sugarcane industry is located near the southern tip of Lake Okeechobee in South Florida. Palm Beach County produces the most Sugarcane (70% area and 75%-ton weight). The rest is grown in the adjoining counties of Hendry, Glades, and Martin. While most Sugarcane is grown on manure soils, about 20% is produced on sandy mineral soils. 

Louisiana’s 22 parishes produce Sugarcane on more than 400,000 acres – producing approximately 13 million tons annually. Sugarcane production and processing in Louisiana employs approximately 17,000 jobs – and the state boasts 11 raw sugar factories. Louisiana Sugarcane harvesting usually begins in October. However, the farmer should keep one percent of the farm planted with new seed Sugarcane annually. Before harvest, it is essential to plant, but rain and muddy conditions can delay planting. 

Sugarcane requires fertile, well-drained soil and an abundant moisture supply for successful growth. It has a long growing season that allows it to withstand short-term droughts. Late spring or early autumn freezes can dramatically affect production and quality. Irrigation is not common in Louisiana but is sometimes done on some farms during long dry periods. In normal years, irrigation is not required due to heavy rainfall. Louisiana Sugarcane harvesting usually begins in October. 

However, the farmer should keep one percent of his farm planted with new seed Sugarcane annually. Before harvest, it is essential to plant, but rain and muddy conditions can delay planting. In Louisiana, the largest Sugarcane-growing state, Sugarcane production is largely confined to the Mississippi River Delta, where the soil is fertile. However, the sugar industry has spread north and west to non-traditional Sugarcane growing areas in Louisiana. 

Sugarcane expansion has largely come at a time when profits from competing crops, such as Rice and Soybeans, have declined. Louisiana production has also increased because of the adoption of higher-yielding varieties of Sugarcane and investment in new harvesting combinations. The Sugarcane varieties are grown to some extent in Louisiana are L 01-283, L 01-299, L 03-371, HoCP 96-540, L 99-226, HoCP 00-950, HoCP 04-838, Ho 05-961, Ho 07-613, HoCP 09-804 and L 11-183.

Sugar quickly became a major business, and the island’s population grew rapidly, with 337,000 people displaced over a century. The need for Sugarcane labor reinforced immigration that gives Hawaii its multicultural background today, and the effect of early afforestation formed the basis of our labor laws. In addition, the demand for sugar water led to the construction of wide canals, the emptiness of rivers, and the development of the most exclusive water rights in the country. 

Texas is the fourth largest Sugarcane producer in the United States, with 1.5 million tons grown on 40,000 acres per year. The economic impact is over $ 200 million and provides hundreds of permanent jobs in a region where employment opportunities are far below the state average. The Sugarcane industry in Texas is located in Cameron, Hidalgo, and Willis counties in the Lower Rio Grande Valley (LRGV). 

It is the fourth largest source of American Sugarcane. Sugarcane is produced on 43,000 acres with an annual harvest of 1.5 million tonnes. Texas Sugarcane grows in the lower reaches of the Rio Grande Valley at the southern tip of the state. The region has a subtropical climate – long, hot summers and short, mild cold. Killing freezes are a recurring threat, and hurricanes and droughts have significantly reduced yields over the years. 

Sugarcane should be consistently moist in well-drained soil but not wet or over-watered. If you do not live in an area with heavy rainfall, it will need extra irrigation. A dry spell will be helpful to slow down the growth in the lower part of the stalk and increase sugar production. Sugarcane needs high temperatures and sunlight for maximum growth. Most Sugarcane cultivation cannot withstand temperatures below freezing or freezing. 

In case you missed it: Organic Sugarcane Farming, Production Practices

Sugarcane that grows in cold conditions can cause the leaves to turn brown and wither and the plant to die during prolonged frosts. However, if you live in hot climates, you can grow Sugarcane outside. Sugarcane needs the following things to survive and thrive.

Sugarcane has been successfully cultivated for decades in the Imperial Valley of California. The soil is rich in relatively deep loam. It is well suited for farming, with the availability of irrigation water due to the preferential allocation of water from the Colorado River basin by the Imperial Valley. The area is known as one of the most productive agricultural areas globally.

Due to the dry climate, irrigation, and intense sunlight, Imperial Valley Sugarcane can be planted year-round, unlike in Florida, Louisiana, and Texas, where the rains limit the harvest season to six months. 

Sugarcane is propagated vegetatively. It is also a perennial crop. After the first crop, called “plant cane,” is planted, regrowth or “ratoon cane” is harvested each year until the condition of the plant deteriorates. An average of three annual crops are harvested until it is replanted. When replanting (late August to January), some parts of the mature Sugarcane field are reserved for “seed cane.” 

The material is divided into stalk pieces that are planted according to the condition of the plants. They are applied after two to four years. Sugarcane stalks are cut by hand into seed pieces, laid out in twin rows horizontally in the field, and covered with soil three to eight inches deep. Sugarcane is harvested from late October to mid-April. Sugar production is usually higher because the weather is cold.

Sugarcane harvest at the best time in South Florida; it is necessary to harvest some fields before the Sugarcane plants reach their maximum productivity. The fields are burned to remove farm waste, and then mechanically harvested Sugarcane is loaded onto trucks and transported to the mill. 

Insects and mites that feed on the Sugarcane crop in Florida can increase production costs and reduce yields. However, Sugarcane cultivation is relatively resistant to pests common in semi-tropical environments. Sugarcane’s pests include wireworms, white grubs, Sugarcane borers, lesser cornstalk borer, aphids, and Sugarcane rust mite. 

In case you missed it: Sugarcane Seed Germination, Time, Temperature, Process

An integrated pest management (IPM) program with several balanced components will provide effective borer control and increase profits without harming the environment. The most important part of the IPM program for Sugarcane borers is regular scouting. Recommended control options include biological agents, planting varieties that are resistant to infection and damage, planting borer-free seed pieces, and pesticides. 

Harvesting of Sugarcane in Hawaii and Louisiana is highly mechanized. The machines lift the canes to the same height, cut them to the ground, and collect them in rows. In Florida, Sugarcane is mainly harvested by hand. Leaves and trash are burned in rows by flamethrowers. An alternative way is to burn the leaves with standing Sugarcane, after which it is cut and taken directly to the mill. In both cases, the delay between cutting and milling should be as short as possible as the delay results in a loss of sugar content.

Machines are being developed to cut, clean, and load the Sugarcane to be transported directly to the mill. In the United States, where winter frosts are a threat, Sugarcane harvesting should begin early to maximize yields. When plants are killed by freezing, the loss of sugar is rapid. Although such plants are suitable for extracting sugar if harvested immediately after freezing, it may not be possible to cover large areas. 

In non-mechanized areas, the knife is still used to cut, and the leaves are removed. But, then, this is a difficult and time-consuming task. In general, farmers harvest from one plant for 3-5 years. Once the cane is cut, the rotating arms take off the leaves and their growth and pass the stalks through a cutter that cuts them into small pieces. 

It grows in warm climates and can be found even in the southern parts of the United States; Texas is one of those states and was an essential part of Sugarcane in East Texas, usually south of the center of East Texas. In addition, it is widely grown in southern Louisiana. 

Sugarcane cultivation in Florida is usually done with mechanical harvesting of burnt Sugarcane. 

Climate, soil suitability, and proximity of mills limit production in this region of the state. However, it has a long growing season that allows it to withstand short-term droughts. 

In case you missed it: Ring-pit Method of Sugarcane Cultivation

About three-quarters of Sugarcane is grown and processed into sugar, which is used to make bread, canned fruits and vegetables, beverages, cakes, candy, cereals, ice cream, and other foods. The rest is packaged in large industrial or family-sized bags to be sold directly to consumers.

Growing Sugarcane requires living in tropical climates such as Hawaii, Florida, and Louisiana. Also, it is grown in limited quantities in Texas and a few other Gulf coastal states. Since Sugarcane is all hybrid, Sugarcane is sown using stalks obtained from the mother plant of a suitable breed.

Now Available on Android !!!

Wants to run sugar Cane farming in Sierra Leone but needs a technical guide.



Save my name and email in this browser for the next time I comment.


 



© Copyright 2022, AgriFarming | All Rights Reserved. 