Some of the assorted pastries at the launch of the new Artcaffe branch at Rhapta Avenue. Photo | Pool






By 
Kemzy Kemzy




For any sweet tooth person or just any foodie, Artcaffé coffee and bakery is one of those places you just can’t pass by. With over 35 branches in Kenya, the eatery has made a brand out of its name. All these eateries have a full-service and on the move bakery coffee shop, restaurant and bar with a wide variety of meals and drinks on the menus.

I attended the launch of their latest branch in Westlands - the Artcaffé Market, gourmet food store and I was amazed. This new location is just 15 minutes away from Nairobi CBD at Rhapta Square on Rhapta road. You can’t miss the big brightly-lit signage on the road. 

Sweet tooth heaven at Artcaffé Rhapta Square. Photo | Pool



I got a very warm welcome from the hostess with a complimentary glass of champagne before a tour of the new property. This three-storey building is a one stop shop for all your needs. On the ground floor is the Artcaffé Market Cellar and Gourmet food store which is fully stocked with the finest selection of locally sourced and imported foods and drinks. It offers an inspiring shopping experience including Artcaffé products.

On the second floor, is the spacious Artcaffé coffee & bakery- restaurant whereby you can relax, eat and catch a break after your shopping. They have an entirely new addition to their pastry menu. On the same floor is Peekaboo kids and more store which sells kids toys and games. 

My favourite part of the store, apart from the fully stocked wine and spirit shop on the ground floor was the rooftop bar. This is where the party lives and the setup was beautifully done with a wide range of pastries and cakes to entice the taste buds. There were assorted croissants, brioches, mini tarts, pecan pies, cookies, cake slices and mousses. I don’t think I have had so much sugar in my system in my entire adulthood. 

I loved the scrumptious pecan pie and the homemade mini-quiches made with buttery short crust pastry and filled with feta cheese and chicken. For the cakes, I settled on the all-time favourite- Salted caramel and cappuccino with an extra slice of Trico lad. All these sugar and more glasses of sparkling wine under the bright moonlight as we were being serenaded by the live band was just heavenly. The rooftop bar is perfect for a date night under the stars with a view of the Nairobi skyline. 

For feedback to the editor email [email protected]




We come to you.
We are always looking for ways to improve our stories. Let us know what you liked and what we can improve on.



It emerged that a last-minute intervention by President Kenyatta facilitated Musyoka’s return to the Azimio fold.


From 25 per cent households headed by a single parent in 2009, the number had shot to a staggering four out of 10 three years ago


This will be Ms Karua's first visit to Nyanza since she was unveiled as Mr Odinga's running mate. 


If you have an Ad-blocker please disable it and reload the page or try again later.



Nation Media Group © 2022


Welcome!